= Blocks-World Hierarchical Look-Ahead Agent =
This project contains a version of blocks world that is formulated for hierarchical task decomposition.  It uses three levels of problem spaces with look-ahead in the middle problem space. For the top and bottom problem spaces, there is pre-existing selection knowledge that is sufficient to eliminate search.

The middle problem space consists of the pick-up and put-down operators. For that problem space there are rules that create the internal copy of the state  (in evaluate-operator/move-block/elaborations) and there are rules that simulate the actions on that internal copy (in evaluate-operator/move-block/pick-up & put-down Finally, there are rules that provide some evaluations for the lookahead   evaluate-operator/move-block/evaluation

The top level has a single operator: move-block, which moves a block (moving-block) to a destination. The destination can be the top of another block or the table.

The next level consists of two operators: pick-up and put-down and they arise in an operator no-change for move-block. The rules for these are found under move-block. This level introduces the gripper, which can be holding a block or empty and is a structure on the top state.

The bottom level has a variety of operators: open-gripper, close-gripper, move-gripper-above, move-gripper-down, and move-gripper-up. The structures manipulated by these operators are part of the gripper structure on the top state. These operators arise in an operator no-change for both pick-up and put-down and the rules for them are under pick-up. 

=== Soar capabilities ===
  * Basic PSCM functions: State Elaboration, Operator Proposal, Operator Evaluation, Internal Operator Application, Subgoaling
  * Internally simulates external environment including an i/o link

=== Download Links===
  * pending
  
=== External Environment ===
  * None.

=== Default Rules ===
  * simple.soar
  * selection.soar

=== Associated Publications ===
  * The Soar Cognitive Architecture: Chapter 4

=== Developer ===
  * John Laird

=== Soar Versions ===
  * Soar 8,9

=== Project Type ===
  * VisualSoar