= !SoarEditor = 
The !SoarEditor is an Eclipse plugin that allows you to use the powerful Eclipse IDE for writing Soar agents.  It provides syntax coloring, auto-indenting, data map construction and generation, attribute/value completion (using the data map) and agent file structure management.

=== Download Links ===
The !SoarEditor is downloadable via [http://download.eclipse.org/eclipse/downloads/ Eclipse] itself.
  # Install the latest version of Eclipse.
  # In Eclipse, go to _Help_ > _Install New Software..._
  # Click on the _Add..._ button to add a new update site.
  # Under _Name_, enter whatever you like—something like "Soar Editor".
  # Under _Location_, enter https://raw.github.com/mtinkerhess/Soar-Editor/master/Site/site.xml
  # Click _OK_, and wait for a minute for Eclipse to download information about the plugin.
  # Check the box next to "Uncategorized", and click _Next_.
  # Click _Next_ again.
  # Select "I accept the terms of the licence agreement" and click _Finish_.
  # When prompted, click _OK_ to allow Eclipse to install unsigned content.
  # Click _Restart Now_ to finish installing the plugin.

=== Documentation ===
  * While there isn't much documentation yet, you can find a _Getting Started_ page [https://github.com/mtinkerhess/Soar-Editor/wiki/Getting-Started here].

=== Developer ===
  * Miller Tinkerhess.  (it did borrow from several previous Soar Eclipse plug-in projects programmed by other people)

=== Language ===
  * Java



