#summary Soar projects using April.

[http://april.eecs.umich.edu Edwin Olson's April group projects and libraries] are used with some Soar projects. These projects have been recently moved to a new top-level module `aprilsoar`.

= Windows =

== Updated Jars ==

Right now, the libraries posted on april.eecs.umich.edu as described below are not sufficiently up to date. Until they are updated, the jars [http://www.eecs.umich.edu/~soar/sitemaker/misc/april/ need to be downloaded from a secondary site].

== Procedure ==

[Build Follow the instructions to check out and build] the Semantic Memory branch of Soar in to a folder named `smem`. Technically, `aprilsoar` can be used against the trunk or other Soar branches, but the SMem branch will provide the least resistance.

Check out the `trunk/aprilsoar` module next to `smem`. `aprilsoar` cannot be built until all of the April dependencies are on the system. April tools and libraries are obtained from the [http://april.eecs.umich.edu/resources.php April resource pages].

Create a top-level `april` folder next to `aprilsoar` and `smem`. Download the [http://april.eecs.umich.edu/packages/april-mega.jar april-mega.jar] and place in to the `april` folder. The mega jar includes many tools and a few dependencies for the april project.

The mega jar depends on [http://kenai.com/projects/jogl/pages/Home JOGL]. To satisfy this dependency, download the JOGL zip appropriate for your platform from [http://download.java.net/media/jogl/builds/archive/jsr-231-1.1.1a/ this JOGL builds folder]. Unzip the JOGL file and place the contents in its `libs` folder in to the `april` folder. My `april` folder looks like this:

  * `april-mega.jar`
  * `gluegen-rt.dll`
  * `gluegen-rt.jar`
  * `jogl.dll`
  * `jogl.jar`
  * `jogl_awt.dll`
  * `jogl_cd.dll`

The ant build scripts have not been fully updated. For now, use Eclipse. Start by creating a new workspace and importing existing projects in to it:

  * `aprilsoar/soar-room`
  * `smem/soar-java/soar-smljava`
  * `smem/soar-java/soar-debugger`
  * `aprilsoar/soar-sps`
    * `soar-sps` is currently Linux only but that may change soon. You may omit this from the import to simplify things.

Set a few build path variables for the `soar-room` and `soar-sps` (if applicable) projects:

  * `APRIL_MEGA`
    * Path to `april-mega.jar`
  * `GLUEGEN_RT`
    * Path to `gluegen-rt.jar`
  * `JOGL`
    * Path to `jogl.jar`

Update the `PATH` environment variable for the _room_ launch configuration to include the `april` folder. Note: this may be unnecessary if I can get relative paths working correctly.