= OS-Specific Library Search Paths= 

This section is not about building Soar, but running the executables that
you've built. Because the Soar libraries are not installed to standard
locations such as /usr/lib on Linux or C:\Windows\System32 on Windows,
the operating system doesn't know where to look for them. This is probably
the biggest and most frequently encountered problem when getting Soar up
and running.

The most straightforward way to solve this problem is to tell the OS where
to look. In Linux, this means setting the LD_LIBRARY_PATH environment
variable to include the directory libSoar.so is in. Similarly on Mac OSX,
you should set DYLD_LIBRARY_PATH. On both operating systems, the command
for setting the environment variable should look like:
{{{
export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=$LD_LIBRARY_PATH:/directory/of/your/Soar/library
}}}
or
{{{
export DYLD_LIBRARY_PATH=$DYLD_LIBRARY_PATH:/directory/of/your/Soar/library
}}}
Note that you can't put spaces around the =, and you have to use export
so that the variable will be inherited by child processes.

In Windows, you should set PATH to include the directory containing Soar.dll.

The rest of this section contains explanations of what's going on under
the hood of every operating system so that you'll have some insight
should you run into issues.

=== Linux ===
In Linux, the GNU linker provides an -rpath flag that hard codes
library search paths into executables. We use this flag for all native
executables, such as TestCLI and TestSoarPerformance. These paths are
set assuming that the executables and required libraries (specifically
libSoar.so) reside in the same directory, which is the default build
behavior. Therefore, as long as you don't move the executables or
libraries to different relative directories, you should be able to just
run the executables without doing anything special. If you are having
problems, you should manually set LD_LIBRARY_PATH.

=== Mac OS X ===
Dynamic libraries on OS X have the concept of install_name. Basically,
shared libraries have a full path hard-coded into them when they are
built, and when executables link against the library, they record those
paths as the places they'll look for the library at runtime. For more
details, see

https://developer.apple.com/library/mac/documentation/developertools/conceptual/MachOTopics/1-Articles/loading_code.html

We set the install_name of libSoar.dylib to be
"@executable_path/libSoar.dylib", which means that every executable
will look for the Soar library in the same directory as itself. For
the executables that are built with Soar, such as TestCLI and
TestSoarPerformance, you should be able to just run them without
any problems. If you are having problems, you should manually set
DYLD_LIBRARY_PATH.

The more likely case when this will appear is when you build your own
SML programs and link them against libSoar.dylib. Your programs will
also think that the library exists in the same directory as themselves. In
this case please use the above solution. As a more permanent fix,
you can change the library's install_name to the absolute path of the
library using the install_name_tool program. Every program you build from
then on will look for the library using the absolute path, which should
not fail unless you move the library or rebuild it. Please consult the
system man page for that command for further information.


=== Windows ===
Windows searches the executable's directory for needed libraries by
default, and since all Soar libraries and executables are in the same
directory, there shouldn't be any library not found errors. If you are
building your own executable environments, either put them in the same
directory as Soar.dll, or add the directory that contains Soar.dll to
your PATH environment variable. For more information about library search
order, see

http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/windows/desktop/ms682586%28v=vs.85%29.aspx


= Java Search Paths =
The Java virtual machine has two sets of search paths: the class path and
the library path. In general, java classes and jars are searched for
in the class path, and native libraries that are loaded by JNI are searched
for in the library path. Running Java SML clients requires you to set
both correctly.

The SWIG generated SML wrapper classes are contained in sml.jar,
so you need to include its path (not the path to the directory
containing the jar) in the class path. Those classes in turn load the
Java_sml_ClientInterface and Soar native libraries, so the directory
containing these libraries must be in the library path.

You can set the class path either by setting the CLASSPATH environment
variable (remember to export in Linux and OSX), or passing a command
line switch to the java executable:
{{{
java -cp /path/to/sml.jar
}}}
By default, the JVM will include the LD_LIBRARY_PATH and DYLD_LIBRARY_PATH
environment variables in the library path in Linux and OS X,
respectively. In Windows the current working directory and the PATH
environment variable is included by default. You can manually set the
library path by passing a command line switch to the java executable:
{{{
java -Djava.library.path=/directory/of/your/Soar/library
}}}
Note that while you can also set java.library.path at runtime using Java
code, you have to use some hacks to make the virtual machine actually
acknowledge the changes. See this page for more information:

http://stackoverflow.com/questions/5419039/is-djava-library-path-equivalent-to-system-setpropertyjava-library-path

= Python Search Paths =
Like with Java, SWIG also generates a Python wrapper, called
Python_sml_ClientInterface.py as well as a native library called
_Python_sml_ClientInterface.so (.pyd in Windows) for the Python
interface. Unlike Java, Python only has one list of directories where it
looks for both files, contained in sys.path. On all operating systems,
this list will include the directories in the environment variable
PYTHONPATH. You can also set sys.path directly in your python script. For
example:
{{{
import sys
sys.path.append('/directory/of/your/Soar/library')
import Python_sml_ClientInterface as sml
}}}