= Name =
'''alias''' - Define a new alias, or command, using existing commands and arguments.

= Synopsis =
 alias name [<u>cmd</u> <args>]
 alias

= Options =
No options.

= Description =
This command defines new aliases by creating Soar procedures with the given name.  The new procedure can then take an arbitrary number of arguments which are post-pended to the given definition and then that entire string is executed as a command.  The definition must be a single command, multiple commands are not allowed.  The '''alias''' procedure checks to see if the name already exists, and does not destroy  existing procedures or aliases by the same name.  Existing  aliases  can  be  removed  by  using  the  [[unalias]] command.    With  no  arguments,  '''alias'''  returns  the  list  of  defined aliases.  With only the name given, '''alias''' returns the current  definition.

= Examples = 
The alias ''wmes'' is defined as:
 alias wmes print -i
If the user executes a command such as:
 wmes {(* ^superstate nil)}
it is as if the user had typed this command:
 print -i {(* ^superstate nil)}
To check what a specific alias is defined as, you would type
 alias wmes

= Default Aliases =
{| border="1" cellpadding="2"
| Alias || Maps to
|-
| [[a]] || alias
|}

Alias	 Maps to
?	help
a	alias
aw	add-wme
chdir	cd
ctf	command-to-file
d	run -d 1
dir	ls
e	run -e 1
eb	explain-backtraces
ex	excise
exit	quit
fc	firing-counts
fw	format-watch
gds_print	gds-print
h	help
inds	indifferent-selection
init	init-soar
interrupt	stop-soar
is	init-soar
l	learn
man	help
p	print
pc	print --chunks
pr	preferences
pw	pwatch
rn	rete-net
rw	remove-wme
set-default-depth	default-wme-depth
sn	soarnews
ss	stop-soar
st	stats
step	run 1
stop	stop-soar
support	preferences
topd	pwd
un	unalias
w	watch
wmes	print -i

= See Also =
[[unalias]]

