= Name =
'''indifferent-selection''' - Controls indifferent preference arbitration.

= Synopsis =
 indifferent-selection
 indifferent-selection [-s]
 indifferent-selection [-bgfxl]
 indifferent-selection [-et] [value]
 indifferent-selection [-p] <parameter> [reduction policy]
 indifferent-selection [-r] <parameter> <reduction policy> [reduction rate]
 indifferent-selection [-a] [setting]

= Options =
{| border="1" cellpadding="2"
| -s, --stats || Summary of settings
|-
| <policy> || Set exploration policy
|-
| <parameter> [value] || Get/Set exploration policy parameters (if value not given, returns the current value)
|-
| <parameter> [reduction policy] || Get/Set exploration policy parameter reduction policy (if policy not given, returns the current)
|-
| <parameter> <reduction policy> [reduction rate] || Get/Set exploration policy parameter reduction rate for a policy (if rate not give, returns the current)
|-
| -a, --auto-reduce [on,off] || Get/Set auto-reduction setting (if setting not provided, returns the current)
|}

= Description =
The '''indifferent-selection''' command allows the user to set options relating to selection 
between operator proposals that are mutually indifferent in preference memory.

The primary option is the exploration policy (each is covered below).  When Soar starts,
'''softmax''' is the default policy.  The first time Soar-RL is enabled, the architecture
automatically changes the policy to '''epsilon-greedy''' and issues a message to the trace.

Some policies have parameters to temper behavior.  The '''indifferent-selection''' command
provides basic facilities to automatically reduce these parameters exponentially and linearly
each decision cycle by a fixed rate.  In addition to setting these policies/rates, the
'''auto-reduce''' option enables the automatic reduction system (disabled by default), 
for which the Soar decision cycle incurs a small performance cost.

= Exploration Policies =
{| border="1" cellpadding="2"
| -b, --boltzmann || Tempered softmax (uses temperature)
|-
| -g, --epsilon-greedy || Tempered greedy (uses epsilon)
|-
| -x, --softmax || Random, biased by numeric indifferent values (if a non-positive value is encountered, resorts to a uniform random selection)
|-
| -f, --first || Deterministic, first indifferent preference is selected
|-
| -l, --last || Deterministic, last indifferent preference is selected
|}

= Exploration Policy Parameters =
{| border="1" cellpadding="2"
| ''Parameter Name'' || ''Acceptable Values'' || ''Default Value''
|-
| -e, --epsilon || [0, 1] || 0.1
|-
| -t, --temperature || (0, inf) || 25
|}

= Exploration Policy Parameter Auto-Reduction Policies =
{| border="1" cellpadding="2"
| ''Policy Name'' || ''Valid Rates'' || ''Default Rate''
|-
| exponential <font color="red">default</font> || [0, 1] || 1
|-
| linear || [0, inf] || 0
|}


= Default Aliases =
{| border="1" cellpadding="2"
| Alias || Maps to
|-
| inds || indifferent-selection
|}

= See Also =
[[numeric-indifferent-mode]] [[rl]]

