= Name =
'''print''' - Print items in working memory or production memory.

= Synopsis =
 print [-fFin] production_name
 print -[a|c|D|j|r|T|u][fFin]
 print [-it] [-d <u><depth></u>] <i>identifier</i>|<i>timetag</i>|<i>pattern</i>
 print -s[oS]
 print -e <i>pattern</i>

= Options =

==Printing items in production memory==
{| border="1" cellpadding="2"
| -a, --all ||  print the names of all productions currently loaded
|-
| -c, --chunks ||  print the names of all chunks currently loaded
|-
| -D, --defaults ||  print the names of all default productions currently loaded
|-
| -f, --full ||  When printing productions, print the whole production. This is the default when printing a named production.
|-
| -F, --filename || also prints the name of the file that contains the production.
|-
| -i, --internal ||  items should be printed in their internal form.  For productions, this means leaving conditions in their reordered (rete net) form.  
|-
| -j, --justifications ||  print the names of all justifications currently loaded.  
|-
| -n, --name ||  When printing productions, print only the name and not the whole production. This is the default when printing any category of productions, as opposed to a named production.
|-
| -r, --rl || Print Soar-RL rules
|-
| -T, --template || Print Soar-RL templates
|-
| -u, --user ||  print the names of all user productions currently loaded
|-
| <u>production_name</u> ||  print the production named <u>production-name</u>
|}

==Printing items in working memory==
{| border="1" cellpadding="2"
| -d, --depth <i>n</i> ||  This option overrides the default printing depth (see the [[default-wme-depth]] command for more detail).
|-
| -e, --exact || Print only the wmes that match the pattern
|-
| -i, --internal ||  items should be printed in their internal form. For working memory, this means printing the individual elements with their timetags, rather than the objects.
|-
| -t, --tree ||  wmes should be printed in in a tree form (one wme per line).
|-
| -v, --varprint || Print identifiers enclosed in angle brackets.
|-
| <i>identifier</i> ||  print the object <i>identifier</i>. <i>identifier</i> must be a valid Soar symbol such as <b u>S1 </b /u>
|-
| <i>pattern</i> ||  print the object whose working memory elements matching the given pattern.  See Description for more information on printing objects matching a specific pattern.
|-
| <i>timetag</i> ||  print the object in working memory with the given <i>timetag</i>
|}

==Printing the current subgoal stack==
{| border="1" cellpadding="2"
| -s, --stack ||  Specifies that the Soar goal stack should be printed. By default this includes both states and operators. 
|-
| -o, --operators || When printing the stack, print only <b>operators</b>.
|-
| -S, --states || When printing the stack, print only <b>states</b>.
|}

= Description =
The <b>print</b> command is used to print items from production memory or working memory. It can take several kinds of arguments. When printing items from working memory, the Soar objects are printed unless the <code>--internal</code> flag is used, in which case the wmes themselves are printed.  
 (<i>identifier</i> ^<i>attribute value</i> [+])
The pattern is surrounded by parentheses. The <i>identifier</i>, <i>attribute</i>, and <i>value</i> must be valid Soar symbols or the wildcard symbol * which matches all occurrences. The optional <b>+</b> symbol restricts pattern matches to acceptable preferences. If wildcards are included, an object will be printed for each pattern match, even if this results in the same object being printed multiple times.

= Examples = 

Print the objects in working memory (and their timetags) which have wmes with identifier s1 and value v2 (note: this will print the entire s1 object for each match found):
 print --internal (s1 ^* v2)

Print the Soar stack which includes states and operators:
 print --stack

Print the named production in its RETE form:
 print -if <u>prodname</u>

Print the names of all user productions currently loaded:
 print -u

Default print vs tree print:
 print s1 --depth 2
 (S1 ^io I1 ^reward-link R1 ^superstate nil ^type state)
   (I1 ^input-link I2 ^output-link I3)
 
 print s1 --depth 2 --tree
 (S1 ^io I1)
   (I1 ^input-link I2)
   (I1 ^output-link I3)
 (S1 ^reward-link R1)
 (S1 ^superstate nil)
 (S1 ^type state)

= Default Aliases =
{| border="1" cellpadding="2"
| Alias || Maps to
|-
| p || print
|-
| pc || print --chunks
|-
| wmes || print -i
|}

= See Also =

[[default-wme-depth]], [[predefined-aliases]]

