#summary rete-net command documentation
= rete-net =

Save the current Rete net, or restore a previous one.

== Synopsis ==

{{{
rete-net -s|l filename
}}}

=== Default Aliases ===

|| `rn` || `rete-net` ||

== Options ==

|| `-s, --save` || Save the Rete net in the named file. Cannot be saved when there are justifications present. Use `excise -j` ||
|| `-l, -r, --load, --restore` || Load the named file into the Rete network. working memory and production memory must both be empty. Use [cmd_excise excise] ||
|| `filename` || The name of the file to save or load. ||

== Description ==

The rete-net command saves the current Rete net to a file or restores a Rete
net previously saved. The Rete net is Soar's internal representation of
production and working memory; the conditions of productions are reordered and
common substructures are shared across different productions. This command
provides a fast method of saving and loading productions since a special format
is used and no parsing is necessary. Rete-net files are portable across
platforms that support Soar.

Normally users wish to save only production memory. Note that justifications
cannot be present when saving the Rete net. Issuing an
[cmd_init_soar init-soar] before saving a Rete net will remove
all justifications and working memory elements.

If the filename contains a suffix of `.Z`, then the file is compressed
automatically when it is saved and uncompressed when it is loaded. Compressed
files may not be portable to another platform if that platform does not support
the same uncompress utility.

== See Also ==

[cmd_excise excise] [cmd_init_soar init-soar]

