#summary indifferent-selection command documentation
= indifferent-selection =

Controls indifferent preference arbitration.

== Synopsis ==

{{{
indifferent-selection
indifferent-selection [-s]
indifferent-selection [-bgfxl]
indifferent-selection [-et] [value]
indifferent-selection [-p] parameter [reduction_policy]
indifferent-selection [-r] parameter reduction_policy [reduction_rate]
indifferent-selection [-a] [setting]
}}}

=== Default Aliases ===

|| `inds` || `indifferent-selection` ||

== Options ==

|| `-s, --stats` || Summary of settings ||
|| `policy` || Set exploration policy ||
|| `parameter [value]` || Get/Set exploration policy parameters (if value not given, returns the current value) ||
|| `parameter [reduction_policy]` || Get/Set exploration policy parameter reduction policy (if policy not given, returns the current) ||
|| `parameter reduction_policy [reduction_rate]` || Get/Set exploration policy parameter reduction rate for a policy (if rate not give, returns the current) ||
|| `-a, --auto-reduce [on,off]` || Get/Set auto-reduction setting (if setting not provided, returns the current) ||

== Description ==

The indifferent-selection command allows the user to set options relating to
selection between operator proposals that are mutually indifferent in
preference memory.

The primary option is the exploration policy (each is covered below). When Soar
starts, _softmax_ is the default policy. 

*Note*:  As of version 9.3.2, the architecture no longer automatically changes the policy to _epsilon-greedy_ the first time Soar-RL is enabled.

Some policies have parameters to temper behavior. The indifferent-selection
command provides basic facilities to automatically reduce these parameters
exponentially and linearly each decision cycle by a fixed rate. In addition to
setting these policies/rates, the _auto-reduce_ option enables the automatic
reduction system (disabled by default), for which the Soar decision cycle
incurs a small performance cost.

== Exploration Policies ==

|| `-b, --boltzmann` || Tempered softmax (uses temperature) ||
|| `-g, --epsilon-greedy` || Tempered greedy (uses epsilon) ||
|| `-x, --softmax` || Random, biased by numeric indifferent values (if a non-positive value is encountered, resorts to a uniform random selection) ||
|| `-f, --first` || Deterministic, first indifferent preference is selected ||
|| `-l, --last` || Deterministic, last indifferent preference is selected ||

== Exploration Policy Parameters ==

|| *Parameter Name* || *Acceptable Values* || *Default Value* ||
|| `-e, --epsilon` || `[0, 1]` || `0.1` ||
|| `-t, --temperature` || `(0, inf)` || `25` ||

== Exploration Policy Parameter Auto-Reduction Policies ==

|| *Policy Name* || *Valid Rates* || *Default Rate* ||
|| `exponential default` || `[0, 1]` || `1` ||
|| `linear` || `[0, inf]` || `0` ||


== See Also ==

[cmd_numeric_indifferent_mode numeric-indifferent-mode]
[cmd_rl rl]

