#summary cli command documentation
= cli =

Manipulate external command line interface modules.

== Synopsis ==

{{{
cli <module-name> on|off
}}}

== Options ==

|| `on` || Turn a command-line module on. ||
|| `off` || Turn a command-line module on ||

== Description ==

The `cli` command is used to interface to special, external libraries that
extend the functionality of the Soar command line interface.  For example, a
module may provide the ability to run Tcl or Python code from any Soar command
line.

The first time that you turn a module on, Soar will attempt to look for a
dynamically-linked library based on the module-name passed to the cli command. 
Specifically, it looks for a dll named

`[dllprefix][language]SoarLib.[dllextension]`

(The dll prefix and extension vary depending on the platform.)

When the `on` parameter is given, all future Soar commands will be passed to the
module for processing.  This allows the module to provide additional
functionality.

Similarly, the off message will send the CLI library an `off` message that will
cause it to unregister all relevant callback handlers and stop processing Soar
commands.

If you'd like to have a cli mode, like Tcl, turned on automatically when Soar 
launches, add the enabling command to your settings.soar file in the main 
Soar directory.  This activates the mode on initial launch, allowing you to 
immediately source files that require that additional functionality.

If you plan to source files that contain tcl commands, you must turn on tcl through the
settings file or in a separate command issued prior to your source command.  Due
to some technical limitation, Soar cannot currently source a file that both turns 
on Tcl and uses it immediately.


== Examples ==

To turn on Tcl mode:

{{{
cli tcl on
}}}

To turn off Tcl mode:

{{{
cli tcl off
}}}