= !TankSoar =

!TankSoar is a multi-agent tank battle game implemented using Java and interfaced with Soar via SML.

The !TankSoar world consists of a rectangular grid, 14 squares wide by 14 squares high. All four sides are bounded by walls made of rock. Interior walls are made of trees. There are a variety of maps that can be used, with different layouts of walls.   Each !TankSoar agent controls one tank. The tank takes up one square in the playing field. A tank has actions it can take, resources it carries, and sensors with which it observes its environment.  In !TankSoar, your tank has many sensors and actions and can interact with other tanks by shooting missiles.

=== Environment Properties ===
  * Multi-agent, incomplete information

=== Download ===
  * Pending

=== Associated Agents ===
  * *[Agent_TankSoar_Simple Simple Bot]*
  * *[Agent_TankSoar_SimpleSound Simple Sound Bot]*
  * *[Agent_TankSoar_Obscure Obscure Bot]*
  * *[Agent_TankSoar_Wander Wander Bot]*
  * *[Agent_TankSoar_Mapping Mapping Bot]*

=== Documentation ===
  * [SoarTutorial Soar Tutorial]: Chapter 3 in the Soar Tutorial is a great introduction to !TankSoar.

=== IO link Specification ===
{{{
^input-link
  (^blocked B1 ^clock 0 ^current-score C3 ^direction north ^energy 1000
       ^energyrecharger no ^health 1000 ^healthrecharger no ^incoming I4
       ^missiles 15 ^my-color blue ^radar-distance 0 ^radar-setting 0
       ^radar-status off ^random 0.07299846410751343 ^resurrect yes ^rwaves R4
       ^shield-status off ^smell S3 ^sound silent ^x 6 ^y 3)
  (B1 ^backward no ^forward yes ^left no ^right no)
  (C3 ^blue 0)
  (I4 ^backward no ^forward no ^left no ^right no)
  (R4 ^backward no ^forward no ^left no ^right no)
  (S3 ^color none ^distance none)
^output-link
  ^move.direction left/right/forward/backward/none
  ^rotate.direction left/right
  ^fire.weapon missile
  ^radar.switch on/off
  ^radar-power.setting 1-14
  ^shields.switch on/off
}}}

=== Developer ===
  * Jonathan Voigt, Mazin Assanie

=== Soar Versions ===
  * Soar 8, 9

=== Language ===
  * Java