= Infinite Mario =

This environment is derived from the Infinite Mario domain from RLCompetition2009 (based on RL-Glue) and uses SML to connect to Soar.

Agents play a variant of Super Mario, a complete side-scrolling video game with destructible blocks, enemies, fireballs, coins, chasms, platforms, etc. The state space is complicated, but factored in an object-oriented way, which captures many aspects of the real world. Challenges include:

  * Path planning: How can Mario navigate around simple obstacles, or through complicated sets of blocks?
  * Option learning and execution: Are there reusable sensory-motor primitives which simplify planning? Can these be learned?
  * Explore / exploit: Do enemies always behave the same way? Are there stochastic effects of blocks that can be learned?

Get more details on the mario domain [http://2009.rl-competition.org/mario.php here].

=== Environment Properties ===
  * Continuous, single-agent, episodic, RL, uncertainty, complete information.

=== Download Links ===
  * [http://web.eecs.umich.edu/~soar/downloads/Domains/InfiniteMario-9.3.2.zip Infinite Mario Download (Linux only)]

=== Associated Agents ===
  * [Agent_InfiniteMario_RL Infinite Mario Soar-RL Agent]

=== Documentation ===
  * Running Instructions
    * Download and install [http://code.google.com/p/soar/wiki/Downloads?tm%3D2 Soar].
    * Configure environment variables for Soar ($SOAR_HOME)
    * Perform the install instructions found at [http://2009.rl-competition.org/software.php#download RL-Competition 2009 software].  Use the software that is already in the above Infinite Mario download, within the 15-rl-competition-2009 directory
    * Configure $COMP_HOME to point to the topmost directory of your local install of the competition software
    * Configure $AGENT_HOME to point to the topmost directory of your local install of MarioSoar
    * cd $AGENT_HOME
    * make clean;make
    * Run the agent ./run.bash config/combined.config
    * cd to trainer $COMP_HOME/trainers/guiTrainerJava/ for GUI trainer and ./run.bash or $COMP_HOME/trainers/consoleTrainerJava/ for headless trainer

=== IO link Specification ===
{{{
pending
}}}

=== Developer ===
  * Shiwali Mohan

=== Soar Versions ===
  * Soar 9.3

=== Language ===
  * Java

=== Associated Publications ===
  * Mohan, S. and Laird, J. E. (2011). An Object-Oriented Approach to Reinforcement Learning in an Action Game. In Proceedings of the Seventh Artificial Intelligence and Interactive Digital Entertainment.
  
  * Mohan, S. and Laird, J. E. (2010). Relational Reinforcement Learning in Infinite Mario (Extended Abstract). In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. 
  
  * Mohan, S. and Laird, J. (2009). Learning to play Mario (Unrefereed). Center for Cognitive Architecture, University of Michigan, Tech. Rep. CCA-TR-2009-03 
