#summary The Soar Wiki, home of living documentation on Soar.
#labels Featured,Phase-Support
#sidebar TableOfContents

[http://code.google.com/p/soar/w/list Wiki index is here].

= What is Soar? =

Soar is a general cognitive architecture for developing systems that exhibit intelligent behavior. Researchers all over the world are using Soar.

Visit the [http://sitemaker.umich.edu/soar Soar home page] for news and general information about Soar. Many research papers and other publications are available on the [Publications Soar publications] page.

= Documentation =

The authoritative documentation for Soar is the Soar Manual. We also provide a set of tutorials for learning Soar hands-on. These are available in any recent Soar distribution in the `share/soar/Documentation` folder. The most recent version of the manual is also [http://code.google.com/p/soar/downloads/detail?name=SoarManual931.pdf here] and the tutorial [http://code.google.com/p/soar/downloads/detail?name=SoarTutorial.zip here].

The [http://www.adobe.com/ Adobe Reader] is needed to view the tutorial and
much of our other documentation (.pdf format).

= Getting Started =

The easiest way to get started with Soar is to obtain the latest distribution from [Downloads the downloads page] and work through all six parts of the tutorial (see above) and to do all of the exercises. Although it's tempting to skip the exercises, they're very useful and even fun.

Be sure to install the appropriate version of Java for your system (32-bit downloads
will not work with 64-bit Java virtual machines and vice versa).

= Questions about Soar? =

The best places for help with Soar are listed on the
[http://code.google.com/p/soar project home page] under the heading _Help and
Documentation_.

= Other Documentation =

See the links to the left, also:
  * [http://soar.googlecode.com/files/dogma.pdf Soar Dogma]: Things nobody told you about coding in Soar that you probably ought to know.
  * [http://sitemaker.umich.edu/soar/soar_workshops Soar Workshop Proceedings].
  * Laird, J. E. (2008) [http://www.eecs.umich.edu/~soar/sitemaker/docs/pubs/Laird%20-%202008%20-%20Extending%20the%20Soar%20Cognitive%20Architecture.pdf Extending the Soar Cognitive Architecture]. In Proceedings of the First Conference on Artificial General Intelligence (AGI-08).
    * Abstract: One approach in pursuit of general intelligent agents has been to concentrate on the underlying cognitive architecture, of which Soar is a prime example. In the past, Soar has relied on a minimal number of architectural modules together with purely symbolic representations of knowledge. This paper presents the cognitive architecture approach to general intelligence and the traditional, symbolic Soar architecture. This is followed by major additions to Soar: nonsymbolic representations, new learning mechanisms, and long-term memories.
  * Lewis, R.L. (2001) [http://www-personal.umich.edu/~rickl/Documents/cognitive-theory-soar.pdf Cognitive theory, Soar]. In International Encylopedia of the Social and Behavioral Sciences. Amsterdam: Pergamon (Elsevier Science).
  * Lewis, R.L. (1999). [http://www-personal.umich.edu/~rickl/Documents/mitecs-article.pdf Cognitive modeling, symbolic]. In Wilson, R. and Keil, F. (eds.), The MIT Encyclopedia of the Cognitive Sciences. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
  * [http://www.eecs.umich.edu/~soar/sitemaker/docs/misc/SoarFunctionalOverview.pdf Soar: A Functional Approach to General Intelligence]
  * [http://www.eecs.umich.edu/~soar/sitemaker/docs/misc/SoarRBSComparison.pdf Soar: A comparison with Rule-Based Systems]
  * [http://www.eecs.umich.edu/~soar/sitemaker/docs/misc/FutureSoarResearch.pdf Soar: Along the Frontiers] (regarding future research)
  * [http://www.eecs.umich.edu/~soar/sitemaker/misc/soar9.svg Block diagram of the Soar 9.3 architecture]

