#summary One-sentence summary of this page.

= List of changes required in upgrading from Soar 7 to Soar 8. ==

_John E. Laird_
_December 11, 1998_

This document list the changes that have to be made to Soar 7 programs so that
they run under Soar 8.

== Preferences in attributes ==

All preferences in attributes are eliminated.  Soar 8 uses preferences
exclusively for the selection of operators.  

  * Previous use of preferences such as best (>) and worst (<) for values of attributes to create defaults must be eliminated. You may need to add operators to select the values of these attributes explicitly. 
  * Parallel preferences (&) are no longer needed to allow multi-valued attributes - attributes that have more than one value in working memory.  All attributes (except the operator attribute of a state) can have multiple values.
  * There are no longer any attribute impasses.

== Decision cycle ==

The order of input, decision, and output has changed.  The new ordering is:

{{{
 input ->  operator propose -> decision -> operator apply  -> output
   ^         i-support                      o-support &         |
   |                                        i-support           |
   --------------------------------------------------------------
}}}

  * Input is called only once per decision.
  * Output is called only once per decision.
  * Only rules that create i-supported structures fire during the operator propose phase.  Rules fire in parallel and to quiescence.
  * During the operator apply phase, all matched rules fire in parallel and to quiescence.

These changes do not necessarily lead to any change in your software, and may
even allow you to simplify your software.

== Selected Operators ==

Selected operators are removed (the `<s> ^operator <o>` working memory element
is removed) as soon as the operator either no longer has an acceptable
preference, or if it would not stay selected because of changes in the
preferences.  A new operator is selected only during decision (thus, there may
be parts of the cycle in which no operator is selected).  

This process replaces the reconsider preference for operators - Soar 8 does not
support reconsider.  You will need to remove all of the rules that create
reconsider preferences (terminate*operator rules).

You may need to _tweak_ the conditions of your proposals so that an operator is
not removed too early or too late. You may also need to split an operator that
created or changed many internal data structures in sequence into separate
operators because the operator will probably be retracted as soon as the first
data structure is modified (which will probably cause the operator proposal to
retract).
   
== Goals ==

Goals (substates) are automatically retracted if any of the o-supported
structure in them become _inconsistent_ with higher levels of the goal/state
stack. A goal with o-supported structure is removed if any of the working
memory elements in higher level goals/states that were tested along the path to
creating the o-supported structure are removed.

The easiest thing to do in response to this change is move o-supported
structures up to the top-level state.

== Dot Notation ==

Dot notation is legal in actions.

== Miscellaneous == 

Some other changes that aren't required, but might be nice to note:

  *  RHS dot notation
  *  Ability to run til agent produces output 
  *  Some ONCs are "free"  (detected immediately, without extra decision cycles)

In the section on the new decision cycle, we should indicate that 
the TSI includes a facility to allow users to stop after the decision
phase.  We could also include the info needed to set up callbacks 
after the decision phase.

