#summary All Soar software

<wiki:toc max_depth="1" />

----
= 9.2 Semantic Memory =

_Beta release_.

Soar 9.2 includes a Semantic Memory module, and this release of Soar 9.2.0 is
the first official release of Soar with semantic memory capabilities. 9.2 also
includes all features from 9.1 (!EpMem) and 9.0 (Soar-RL).

Soar-SMem is a task-independent, architectural integration of an artificial
semantic memory (SMem) with Soar.  The SMem mechanism facilitates deliberate
recording and querying of semantic chunks as a Soar agent executes.

== 9.2.0 ==

[ReleaseNotes#9.2.0 Full release notes for 9.2.0].

  * [http://soar.googlecode.com/files/Soar-Suite-9.2.0-windows.zip 9.2.0 for Windows, 32-bit] (use this if not sure)
  * [http://soar.googlecode.com/files/Soar-Suite-9.2.0-windows-x64.zip 9.2.0 for Windows, 64-bit]

  * [http://soar.googlecode.com/files/Soar-Suite-9.2.0-osx.tar.gz 9.2.0 for Mac OS X, 32-bit] (use this if not sure)
  * [http://soar.googlecode.com/files/Soar-Suite-9.2.0-osx-x64.tar.gz 9.2.0 for Mac OS X, 64-bit]

  * [http://soar.googlecode.com/files/Soar-Suite-9.2.0-linux.tar.gz 9.2.0 for Linux, 32-bit] (use this if not sure)
  * [http://soar.googlecode.com/files/Soar-Suite-9.2.0-linux-x64.tar.gz 9.2.0 for Linux, 64-bit]

  * [http://soar.googlecode.com/files/Soar-Suite-9.2.0-source.tar.bz2 9.2.0 platform-independent source]

= 9.1 Episodic Memory =

_Beta release_.

Soar 9.1 includes an Episodic Memory module, which was first released as Soar
9.1.0.  Soar 9.1.1 is primarily a maintenance release with bugs fixed and minor
features added. 9.1 also includes all of the features from 9.0 (Soar-RL).

Soar-!EpMem is a task-independent, architectural integration of an artificial
episodic memory (!EpMem) with Soar.  The !EpMem mechanism will automatically
record episodes as a Soar agent executes.  These episodes can later be queried
and retrieved in order to improve performance on future tasks. See the !EpMem
manual for details.

== 9.1.1 ==

[ReleaseNotes#9.1.1 Full release notes for 9.1.1].

  * [http://soar.googlecode.com/files/Soar-Suite-9.1.1-windows.zip 9.1.1 for Windows, 32-bit] (use this if not sure)
  * [http://soar.googlecode.com/files/Soar-Suite-9.1.1-windows-x64.zip 9.1.1 for Windows, 64-bit]

  * [http://soar.googlecode.com/files/Soar-Suite-9.1.1-osx.tar.gz 9.1.1 for Mac OS X, 32-bit] (use this if not sure)
  * [http://soar.googlecode.com/files/Soar-Suite-9.1.1-osx-x64.tar.gz 9.1.1 for Mac OS X, 64-bit]

  * [http://soar.googlecode.com/files/Soar-Suite-9.1.1-linux.tar.gz 9.1.1 for Linux, 32-bit] (use this if not sure)
  * [http://soar.googlecode.com/files/Soar-Suite-9.1.1-linux-x64.tar.gz 9.1.1 for Linux, 64-bit]

  * [http://soar.googlecode.com/files/Soar-Suite-9.1.1-source.tar.bz2 9.1.1 platform-independent source]

== 9.1.0 ==

[ReleaseNotes#9.1.0 Full release notes for 9.1.0].

  * [http://sourceforge.net/projects/soar/files/Soar%209/9.1.0/Soar-Suite-9.1.0-beta-osx-intel.tar.gz/download 9.1.0 for Mac OS X, Intel, 32-bit]
  * [http://sourceforge.net/projects/soar/files/Soar%209/9.1.0/Soar-Suite-9.1.0-beta-osx-ppc.tar.gz/download 9.1.0 for Mac OS X, PPC, 32-bit]

  * [http://sourceforge.net/projects/soar/files/Soar%209/9.1.0/Soar-Suite-9.1.0-beta-windows.zip/download 9.1.0 for Windows, 32-bit]

  * [http://sourceforge.net/projects/soar/files/Soar%209/9.1.0/Soar-Suite-9.1.0-beta-linux.tar.gz/download 9.1.0 for Linux, 32-bit]

= 9.0 Reinforcement Learning =

Soar 9.0 includes reinforcement learning code (Soar-RL), which was first
released alongside the 8.6.4 beta. Soar 9.0.1 is primarily a maintenance
release, although many bugs have been fixed and minor features added.

Soar-RL is the architectural integration of reinforcement learning (RL) with
Soar. The RL mechanism will automatically tune the values of
numeric-indifferent preference rules based on reward generated while a Soar
agent executes.  These values represent the expected discounted sum of future
rewards the agent will receive if it selects that operator for states matched
by the condition of the rule.  See the RL manual and tutorial in Documentation.

To see Soar-RL in action right away, try the Water Jug RL demo (it can be
loaded from the Demos->Water Jug menu in the Java Debugger). To see the effects
of RL, run it to completion, then init-soar and run it again. Repeat 4-5 times
to see it reach optimal behavior. (Note: the agent may occasionally perform
non-optimal behavior even after it has converged because of its exploration
policy. See the RL manual and tutorial for details).

== 9.0.1 ==

[ReleaseNotes#9.0.1 Full release notes for 9.0.1].

  * [http://soar.googlecode.com/files/Soar-Suite-9.0.1-windows.zip 9.0.1 for Windows, 32-bit] (use this if not sure)
  * [http://soar.googlecode.com/files/Soar-Suite-9.0.1-windows-x64.zip 9.0.1 for Windows, 64-bit]

  * [http://soar.googlecode.com/files/Soar-Suite-9.0.1-osx.tar.gz 9.0.1 for Mac OS X, 32-bit] (use this if not sure)
  * [http://soar.googlecode.com/files/Soar-Suite-9.0.1-osx-x64.tar.gz 9.0.1 for Mac OS X, 64-bit]

  * [http://soar.googlecode.com/files/Soar-Suite-9.0.1-linux.tar.gz 9.0.1 for Linux, 32-bit] (use this if not sure)
  * [http://soar.googlecode.com/files/Soar-Suite-9.0.1-linux-x64.tar.gz 9.0.1 for Linux, 64-bit]

  * [http://soar.googlecode.com/files/Soar-Suite-9.0.1-source.tar.bz2 9.0.1 platform-independent source]

== 9.0.0 ==

[ReleaseNotes#9.0.0 Full release notes for 9.0.0].

  * [http://sourceforge.net/projects/soar/files/Soar%209/9.0.0/Soar-Suite-9.0.0-linux-fixed.tar.gz/download 9.0.0 for Linux, 32-bit]
  * [http://sourceforge.net/projects/soar/files/Soar%209/9.0.0/Soar-Suite-9.0.0-osx-intel.tar.gz/download 9.0.0 for Mac OS X, Intel, 32-bit]
  * [http://sourceforge.net/projects/soar/files/Soar%209/9.0.0/Soar-Suite-9.0.0-windows.zip/download 9.0.0 for Windows, 32-bit]

= 8.6 SML =

Soar 8.6 introduced SML (Soar Markup Language), a new XML-based API for interfacing with Soar, along with many stability updates, performance and feature enhancements.

_Soar releases before 9.x are 32-bit only._

== 8.6.4 ==

A beta release and a separate, initial Soar-RL limited release.

[ReleaseNotes#8.6.4 Full release notes for 8.6.4].

  * [http://soar.googlecode.com/files/Soar-Suite-8.6.4-beta-linux.tar.gz 8.6.4 for Linux]
  * [http://soar.googlecode.com/files/Soar-Suite-8.6.4-beta-osx-intel.tar.gz 8.6.4 for Mac OS X, Intel]
  * [http://soar.googlecode.com/files/Soar-Suite-8.6.4-beta-osx-ppc.tar.gz 8.6.4 for Mac OS X, PPC]
  * [http://soar.googlecode.com/files/Soar-Suite-8.6.4-beta.zip 8.6.4 for Windows]
  * [http://soar.googlecode.com/files/Soar-Suite-8.6.4-rl.7z 8.6.4 Soar-RL for Windows]
  * [http://soar.googlecode.com/files/Soar-Suite-8.6.4-rl-linux-x86.tar.gz 8.6.4 Soar-RL for Linux]
  * [http://soar.googlecode.com/files/Soar-Suite-8.6.4-rl-osx-intel.tar.gz 8.6.4 Soar-RL for Mac OS X, Intel]
  * [http://soar.googlecode.com/files/Soar-Suite-8.6.4-rl-osx-ppc.tar.gz 8.6.4 Soar-RL for Mac OS X, PPC]

== 8.6.3 ==

[ReleaseNotes#8.6.3 Full release notes for 8.6.3].

  * [http://sourceforge.net/projects/soar/files/Soar%208/soar-suite-8.6.3/Soar-Suite-8.6.3.exe/download 8.6.3 for Windows (installer)]
  * [http://sourceforge.net/projects/soar/files/Soar%208/soar-suite-8.6.3/soarsuite-8.6.3.tar.gz/download 8.6.3 platform-independent source]

== 8.6.2 ==

[ReleaseNotes#8.6.2 Full release notes for 8.6.2].

  * [http://sourceforge.net/projects/soar/files/Soar%208/soar-suite-8.6.2/Soar-Suite-8.6.2.exe/download 8.6.2 for Windows (installer)]
  * [http://sourceforge.net/projects/soar/files/Soar%208/soar-suite-8.6.2/soarsuite-8.6.2.tar.gz/download 8.6.2 platform-independent source]

== 8.6.1 ==

[ReleaseNotes#8.6.1 Full release notes for 8.6.1].

  * [http://sourceforge.net/projects/soar/files/Soar%208/soar-suite-8.6.1/Soar-Suite-8.6.1.exe/download 8.6.1 for Windows (installer)]
  * [http://sourceforge.net/projects/soar/files/Soar%208/soar-suite-8.6.1/Soar8.6.1-libs.zip/download 8.6.1 Windows Library binaries]
  * [http://sourceforge.net/projects/soar/files/Soar%208/soar-suite-8.6.1/Soar-Suite-8.6.1.dmg/download 8.6.1 for Mac OS X (dmg)]
  * [http://sourceforge.net/projects/soar/files/Soar%208/soar-suite-8.6.1/Soar-Suite-8.6.1.tar.bz2/download 8.6.1 platform-independent source]

== 8.6.0 ==

[ReleaseNotes#8.6.0 Full release notes for 8.6.0].

  * [http://sourceforge.net/projects/soar/files/Soar%208/soar-suite-8.6.0/Soar-Suite-8.6.0.exe/download 8.6.0 for Windows (installer)]

= 8.5.2 =

[ReleaseNotes#8.5.2 Full release notes for 8.5.2].

= 8.5.1 =

[ReleaseNotes#8.5.1 Full release notes for 8.5.1].

= 8.5.0 =

[ReleaseNotes#8.5.0 Full release notes for 8.5.0].

= 8.4.5 =

Soar 8.4.5 is simply a rebuild of Soar 8.4 using a more recent version of Tcl (Tcl8.3) and a standardized directory structure for Soar and related packages, such as Eaters, Tanksoar and SGIO. This cleans up the installation and build procedures, and eliminates duplication of code for the various Soar-related packages. For Windows systems, Soar 8.4.5 is also packaged using InstallShield for easier installation. Users are encouraged to install Soar 8.3.5 unless they will want to embed Soar within another application, in which case Soar 8.4.5 should be used, along with SGIO 1.0.5.

  * [http://www.eecs.umich.edu/~soar/sitemaker/releases/8.4.5/ Soar 8.4.5]

= 8.4 =

Functionally the same as Soar 8.3, but Soar 8.4 includes the new C API for encapsulated interfacing to external C programs. If your application does not require interfacing to other systems, you should use Soar 8.3. Soar 8.4 provides a clean distinction between the Soar kernel and the external user interface, which is Tcl by default. Soar 8.4 also provides a number of compile time options that allows a high degree of customization. These build time options can be used to produce Soar-Lite, a version of Soar without learning, that may allow performance gains of up to a factor of four over previous releases. It is highly recommended that Tcl 8.0 be used with Soar 8.4, but the source code is also compatible with Tcl 7.6 and Tk 4.2.

  * [http://ai.eecs.umich.edu/soar/sitemaker/releases/8.4/ Soar 8.4]

= 8.3.5 =

Soar 8.3.5 is simply a rebuild of Soar 8.3 using a more recent version of Tcl (Tcl8.3) and a standardized directory structure for Soar and related packages, such as Eaters, Tanksoar and SGIO. This cleans up the installation and build procedures, and eliminates duplication of code for the various Soar-related packages. For Windows systems, Soar 8.3.5 is also packaged using InstallShield for easier installation. Users are encouraged to install Soar 8.3.5 unless they will want to embed Soar within another application, in which case Soar 8.4.5 should be used, along with SGIO 1.0.5.

  * [http://www.eecs.umich.edu/~soar/sitemaker/releases/8.3.5/ Soar 8.3.5]

= 8.3 =

Includes some architectural changes described in the release notes; Code modifications may be required depending on your use of O-support. It is highly recommended that Tcl 8.0 be used with Soar 8.3, but the source code is also compatible with Tcl 7.6 and Tk 4.2. Users who are not concerned with interfacing Soar to external environments should definitely use Soar 8.3 rather than 8.4.

  * [http://ai.eecs.umich.edu/soar/sitemaker/releases/8.3/ Soar 8.3]

= 8.2 =

Includes architectural changes described in the release notes; Code modifications are required, however a Soar 7-compatibility mode is available.  Recommended for use with Tcl 8.0, but the source code is also compatible with Tcl 7.6 and Tk 4.2.

  * [http://ai.eecs.umich.edu/soar/sitemaker/releases/8.2/ Soar 8.2]

= 7.3 =

The last supported release of the Soar 7 architecture. Uses Tcl 8.0, but source code is also compatible with Tcl 7.6 and Tk 4.2.  Includes same bug fixes and user interface enhancements made to Soar 8.2.

  * [http://ai.eecs.umich.edu/soar/sitemaker/releases/7.3/ Soar 7.3]

= 7.2 =

The first "official" release of Soar as a dynamically loadable library to Tcl.  Uses Tcl 7.6 and Tk 4.2.  Single code base for all platforms, and a uniform way to start Soar, using the Tcl-Soar Interface (TSI).  All multi-agent functionality supported by Tcl. Released September 1998.

  * [http://ai.eecs.umich.edu/soar/sitemaker/releases/7.2/ Soar 7.2]

= 7.0.4/7.0.5 = 

Statically links with Tcl 7.4. Provides its own internal support for multiple agents and multiple interpreters.  TSI available, but not standard, and somewhat buggy. Released September 1996.

  * Soar 7.0.4/7.0.5(Mac)